Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Kat Bohannon. She is a researcher
and author. And today we're going to talk about
her book Eve How the female body drove 200
million years of human evolution. So, Doctor Bohannon, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks for having me.
So tell us first, uh why 200 million years?
I mean, why do you go back to 200
million years ago? What happened back then? Exactly? And
why do you start the story you present in
the book 200 million years ago?
Oh, because I obviously lack ambition and like to
tell small stories and like to make life simple
for everyone in my life and for my readers,
no, the reason um 200 million is because this
is a critical moment in the evolution of mammals.
Um BECAUSE our bodies are well, they're just not
one thing any biologist will tell you, you contain
many different moments in time in many ways, the
body itself is a unit of time. And so
there are things in you that are fundamentally a
part of your body plan and are very old.
Yeah, your digestive system, there are features of it
that are newer. Our intestines are shorter than they
used to be blah, blah, blah. But what it's
really doing, which is kind of squeezing stuff through
and digesting it and eventually shitting. This is very
old. This is a very old thing that your
body is doing. Um YOUR brain is very, very
recent. Now, parts of your brain are not so
recent, but a lot of what we think of
as characteristic of the human brain, the big frontal
cortex, all that fancy stuff that it does, we
give it a little too much credit. The human
brain is too impressed with itself, I would say
uh but it is much newer, right? And so
when you understand that the body is not arriving
all at once into this moment, we think of
as a moment in history, this body we live
in that actually, it's a continuation of processes that
started a very long time ago. Well, then it
really is a matter of picking a moment, picking
a point at which you say uh the things
I want to talk about kind of start here.
Yeah. So what I wanted to do in looking
at the new biology of sex differences in mammals
and how they influence our lives as these very
mammalian homo sapiens we are today um was to
go back to something around the dawn of mammals.
Now, that too was tricky around 200 million years
ago because it's sort of like, well, there were
harassments before that. And so why, why Amelia Forbes,
why this moment would say a paleontologist might say.
And I would say, well, the funny thing about
sex differences is while they are not only tied
to reproduction, they are often tied to reproduction. And
in fact, a lot of the mammalian stories, what
a mammal really is, is actually very much tied
to how we make babies and how we keep
them alive and of those traits, then probably the
first thing to look at is lactation because that
arrives when we're still laying eggs, which is a
reasonable thing to do. Um But we start producing
milk and that becomes part of how we bring
the second generation after us into the world and
keep them alive.
So before we get into lactation and some of
the other characteristically female traits that you explore in
the book, um Do you distinguish here between sex
and gender? Because since we're talking about females, I
would imagine that by female, you're referring to sex
exclusively or not?
Yes. Yes. And thank you for clarifying. Um It's
good to do that right up front as you
know, I uh am very much of the camp
that there's a strong difference between biological sex and
human gender identity. That doesn't mean I don't think
there are uh physical or mechanistic drivers for what
would create a gender identity. I'm not saying it's
um all in your head. You know what I
mean? I'm not saying that it's um and it
is by no means a mental illness, unless identifying
as a woman with this body is then also
a mental illness. It's, we don't entirely know what
mechanisms in the brain and in feedback from the
rest of the body, create this messy, complicated thing
we call gender identity. We don't actually know what
drives it, but we don't know what drives it
for anyone so that it might be different in
some populations. Uh DIFFERENT, unexpected, I mean, um shouldn't
be surprising. The brain does weird stuff all the
time, right? Um And if I don't know what
it is that makes me identify as a woman,
uh you know, with these, this very feminine body
that I happen to have, you know, these uh
annoyingly large breasts and having given birth and all
of these other things. No, it's true. I have
to put them in this like industrial garment just
to walk around. It's painful. Otherwise. Um That was
true of my mother too. You know, that's, that's
just the inheritance that I have. Thank you, biologist.
This is, this is just what I have to
deal with. You know, if I don't know, what
about that is making my me identify as a
woman, then it doesn't seem strange to me to
say that Oh, yes. We also don't know what
a trans or a non binary person uh is
doing mechanistically in the brain to create this gender
identity. But it certainly doesn't seem any less legitimate.
But yes, yes. The short answer is yes, big
difference between biological sex and human gender.
And by the way, since you mentioned it rends
women briefly there does what you explore in your
book also apply to them or exclusively to ses
women
depends what part of the body and experience we're
talking about, right? And that's what's really interesting. So
we're hyper social primates, right? You and I and
every other person we've ever met, that's just what
we are, which means that we are always situated
in this social milieu. We're always coming into being
in our brains modeling because brains are so plastic
in our cultural environment and then constantly negotiating between
how we identify versus how others identify us and
how that maps onto how we live our lives.
We do this at every tier of our conscious
experience all the time, even while the brain is
busy doing complicated invisible body mapping things to remember.
Yes, I have that peripheral nervous signal and I
do have a hand still good. Just checking. We
don't pay attention to that us in the higher
order conscious stuff, but it's going on as well.
So this idea that we would be um penetrated
by it constantly. Uh Well, maybe that's the wrong
metaphor it's a bit of a masculine metaphor that
we're always in the web, always in the web
of social influence is not surprising. And the reason
I say all of that is that well, trans
and experience sexism too. Well, in fact, men experience
sexism too. But what's interesting as a woman identified
person who's trans, right? Like as a trans woman
is that they have the experience of having this
body that doesn't fit into how they understand themselves.
Um And that understanding is perfectly legitimate. Your understanding
of yourself is, is very individual. So is theirs,
you know, and, and, and yet they also then
experience what it is to live in a world
as a person who looks female, you know, because
of how they look. And so they experience sexism
as a female person, you know, as a trans
woman. So not a biologically female person. Uh BUT
they, they experience sexism in that way too. And
that's this interesting and tricky thing because of course,
they too experience the weird bullshit that every man
has to deal with, which is whatever the hell
manhood is supposed to be. And whether or not
one measures up, right? Almost every culture has some
very complicated set of rules that men are supposed
to follow that are very poorly defined and constantly
in flux, which are likewise shaped by sexism and
that's built into the identity stuff too. So, right.
So which is to say when I talk about
sexism in the book. I think it very much
applies to trans women when I talk about what
it is to give birth. Well, that doesn't apply
to people who don't have a uterus. But then
again, there are biologically female people who are born
without a uterus or have had to have it
taken out or who never give birth through one
despite having one. And so it doesn't, doesn't apply
to them too. Right.
Mhm. Right. Right. I, I understand that and I
guess that will come back to the sexism bit
toward the end of the interview because that's also
one of the, I mean, not the trade. Exactly.
But some part of the experience that women usually
go through right in their lives. So we'll get
back to that towards the end of our conversation.
But one of the very interesting things that you
mentioned in the book and with, if I'm getting
this wrong, correct me is that one of the
motivations for you to write this book was that
you noticed and other people noticed as well that
the study of the female body is lagging behind
the study of the male body. And I guess
that is applies not only to biology, but also
to medicine and in the specific case of medicine
that might have some very negative implications, right.
Radically negative. Um, ACTUALLY horrific implications. Yes. So I
got, um, the deal to start writing eve back
at the end of 2012. And at that point,
literally, no one had written for the public press,
anything about the male norm. And so I felt
this incredible burden, you know, that I thought my
book was somehow going to have to be this
book and also a giant book about that because
no one had ever heard of it. Um And
no pressure because I was doing my phd on
an unrelated topic at the same time. So I
was clearly not managing my life well, but I
was so grateful when Caroline Criado Perez's book came
out that talked about invisible women that talk about
this gap in data. Um BECAUSE it meant that
I was able to mention it briefly in the
intro to my book, not her book, but rather
all of the work that I had done about
it and then not have to have the entire
book be about it. Um It was a relief
for me and I'm so glad that more attention
in other words has been paid to this simple
fact. But for those of your listeners who have
no idea what I'm talking about, we only study
males. Oh, for God's sake, we're only studying male
bodies in biology. And that has only recently started
to change, right? Because there is this thing called
the male norm. Sometimes it's called male bias in
biology. And what it is is that whether you're
looking at rats or you're looking at um mice
or God up the chain, you know, to dogs
and to pigs and to nonhuman primates and all
the way up to clinical trials in biomedicine too.
We're only studying males and it's not believe it
or not because of sexism. And as a woman,
I can tell you it's a relief to find
something that isn't answered by. Oh, well, that's just
sexism again. Actually, in the case, it was a
good scientists being good scientists because in science you
want to control for your confounds, you want to
make your experiment as clean as possible. You want
to be able to interpret your data to know
what these numbers mean. And if you have too
many confounding factors, it makes your data largely uninterpretable.
You can't do a statistical analysis if you don't
know what the fuck you're looking at, right? So
that means if you have me sexed mammals and
you know, one half of that group, you know,
the females has an estra cycle. Human beings call
this the menstrual cycle. Yeah, that you have this
cascade of hormones that's specific to each species in
terms of the pattern. But you have this rise
and fall of hormone changes that happens on a
semi regular basis, which influences by the way the
entire body. We're not just talking about the ovaries
and the uterus. Almost every tissue in a mammal's
body from bone and out has sex hormone receptors
uh and differing amounts and differing types and what
they do in any given body is variable, in
fact, but they are influencing it. They are changing
how those tissues respond, they're changing how these body
systems behave. And because it does that and because
we don't have a good understanding of how it
does it or how it might be different in
the male and the female. Well, that's a hell
of a confounding factor. So it's not like there
was this sexist cabal or people rubbing their hands
in a back room going ha ha ha. We're
not gonna study females. It's more like we're going
to control for the confound of the feminine by
just not studying females, we're gonna study males and
we're going to assume that as long as we're
not asking questions specifically about reproduction in the females,
like we're not trying to find things out about
the damn uterus. We're just not going to have
the uterus in the picture at all. That's how
we're going to make it happen. Now. That seems
all well and good if you are not aware,
which in the very beginning, many were not that
actually simply having this different distribution of sex hormone
receptors across tissues that simply living a female life,
whether it's a mousy life or a dog life
or a human life is in fact, very influenced
by being sexed. You won't realize that you're missing
a very important of many different questions. So that's
how it went for freaking decades. Um Unfortunately, basic
science uh is precisely what leads to biomedical science.
And so if you've never tested things on females,
and then you arrive at a clinical trial for
say a pharmaceutical intervention or what have you. And
then likewise, in the biomedical spaces, you're not studying
females uh for various reasons. Um Well, then you
might have medicines arrive on the market that had
never been tested on females at all. And that
has been in a word disastrous. Not every time,
not every medication but of the medications where it
is mattered, which we're only finding out in retrospective
data. Uh It's, it's effectively been a femicide. It's
been, it's been horrible. It's been horrible in a
word. Sometimes it's been funny and sometimes it's been
a matter of actual excess death and we're only
just finally starting to catch up. But believe it
or not, my book is optimistic and I am
in fact a friendly and optimistic person. Um, EVEN
though I'm trying to rectify great wrongs. And so,
you know, um, we started to change the rules
in science in the 19 nineties for uh medical
trials, but then realizing that, oh crap, that doesn't
help us enough even remotely without having the basic
science also fill in the gap. Then the NIH
in the United States said, gave new rules and
said, ok, instead of justifying why you have females,
now you must justify why you do not. These
are all good steps. And my book wouldn't exist
with all the, without all the cool new science
that has resulted inevitably in studying the biology of
sex differences. But I will also say it is
not enough and there are enough loopholes to drive
whole truckloads of well medications through. So there's still
work to be done.
I, I bet this is just women's. It is,
it's women's fault. It's their own fault because they
are them hormonal fluctuations and all of that.
Come on. We are just so messy and complicated,
aren't we? Um, WELL, male hormones fluctuate as well.
It's just, you're not quite so cyclical and that's
what's interesting about it. Um For example, we're more
tied to the circadian rhythm, day and night um
in our hormone fluctuations than you are. But you
also do have an andropause. You do have a
decline in a number of different androgen signals as
you age. And that has been understudied too frankly,
which is part of why we don't have very
good treatments for aging males so we can fix
this for everybody is the point.
Yeah. And uh just before we get into those
pauses, the menopause, the andropause and all of that.
Uh What about milk? I mean, how did, how
did it evolve? And what do we need milk
for milk?
Oh, goodness. Um So like a lot of uh
traits in our evolutionary path. It has a long
on ramp. There isn't a moment at which a
boob arrives like a holy descent from the heavens
and then there is nursing. No, in fact, milk
starts 200 million years ago, probably a bit more
actually. And it starts in this wonderfully gross and
weird way. So, milk is ok. What is milk?
Well, early milk is probably a lot like what
you see in monotreme now. So those are the
echidnas and the duck billed platypus. The weirdos hanging
out in Australia. Ok. Um So they still lay
eggs but they also lactate and have fur. They're
actually little freak balls. We don't know how they
haven't evolved away from this, but that's what they
do. They are and are not like early mammals.
So this is before we split into marsupials and
placentals. Ok. This is really, really dawn of mammals
and the ancestors of marsupials and the ancestors of
placentals are just getting on board and every kind
of mammal is still laying eggs. And then however,
they sweat out this fluid from their skin that
their pups lick from their bellies and abdominal wall.
Now, they don't have nipples at this point either.
They just have what are called Mammy patches, which
is true of the duckbill platypus too. So between
their adorable little bills, they lick and slurp milk
from their mother's strange tummy after hatching from eggs
that she's curled into her tail. Uh JUST before
they give birth in this sort of damp burrow,
she's dug for herself. Usually by the side of
a stream. They're very strange animals. Ok. But as
monotreme, yes, they hatch and then they lick milk.
So the eve, which is the exemplar of the
last common species that had the trait. Uh, THE
last common ancestor that I pick for the milk
chapter is Morgana Don. She's actually a whole genus.
Very, very common mammalia form, presumably laid eggs, presumably
lived in burrows, scuttling literally between the feet of
dinosaurs and she licked, you know, lactated her pups,
licked milk from her. But what's interesting and gross
about where milk comes from actually is um very
similar, presumably to well to sea turtles. Ok. So
there are two different kinds of eggs fundamentally for
us land animals. All right, there are leathery eggs,
you know, kind of soft squishy and there are
calcified or hard shelled eggs, which you would think
when you crack an egg to make an omelet,
you're in Portugal, you seem to put eggs on
literally everything you eat. So you're very familiar with
eggs. Yes, you have a beautiful cuisine and I'm
well familiar with it. So, um so when you
crack an egg, you're cracking that um calcified shell,
that's what's happening when you put it into a
dish. OK? And that calcified shell is something that
has evolved in a few different lines in evolution.
Mammals did not have that before they started what
we had were a bit like um a number
of species that lay leathery eggs. Now, when you
lay a leathery egg on land, the immediate problem
you have besides that, it's more fragile. Right? Is
that it is more porous. You need to keep
it damp. Right? Because remember that all bodies evolved
in shallow oceans and we never got over it.
We are very water based creatures. We earth animals.
Yeah. And so once we arrive on land when
we have these early moments when we're being laid
in eggs and we're not amphibians anymore. Ok. Well,
you need to keep those damn things moist. Otherwise
the babies before they're done, you know, developing in
the eggs are going to desiccate, they're going to
dry out and they're gonna die. That's, this is
not a good idea. So, all leathery egged creatures
tend to secrete a kind of, um, well, it's
a bit like snot. It's a bit goo, ok.
It's, it's, it's like when you blow your nose,
you know, it's a mucus. Yeah. Uh, FROM these
specialized glands near where she lays her eggs, the
mother. Ok. So a sea turtle will do this
too. And it's a, it really is an incredibly
amount like blowing your nose. So there's this kind
of mucousy thing that coats each of the eggs
and it primarily keeps the, uh, developing beings in
those eggs moist good. But it doesn't just do
that because, you know, if you've ever had anything
rot in your fridge, you may have noticed that
having things be moist and even remotely, not frozen.
Uh MEANS having things which are prone to growth,
prone to fungus and bacterial invasion. Yeah. So if
you want eggs to gestate for a certain amount
of time and be moist but not immediately be
covered in fungus and be infected with every terrible
bacteria you can imagine. Well, this goo tends to
have a lot of um antifungal and antibacterial properties
and this actually is the theorized origin of milk.
Yeah, because when these creatures and they still do
it today, uh hatch from their leathery eggs, they
slurp up a little bit of this goo which
is still there. It's kind of their first meal.
Now, if the mother is there nursing, you know,
uh kind of providing heat to the babies or
in the, in the den, as we assume morgue
was they too, would have slurped some of this
stuff off of not only the eggs but probably
off of where it came off her butt basically.
So this actually is the dawn of the Madonna
people. This is where the holy lactation actually comes
from. It's from licking goo off of the mama
and eventually in a long evolutionary chain, uh this
goo turns into specialized stuff that glands evolve to
produce and eventually it takes on some of the
watery properties too and becomes what we now call
milk.
Well, I think it's just a beautiful story. So
I don't see anything gross about it.
I love the idea. I love the idea that
Eve and Bethlehem was sitting on a clutch of
eggs. That would be wonderful and still a better
situation than we have now.
Oh, ok. So perhaps let's
just not uh that actually would be then. Of
course, Mary in Bethlehem. I take it back in
the Garden Mary in Bethlehem with her holy clutch
of eggs. Yes.
Uh O ok. So let's trigger the conservatives a
little bit more here. Uh Can men and trans
women produce milk?
Yes. Yes. Now, if you aren't trying to, if
your nipple starts leaking milk and you weren't trying
to have that happen, go immediately to a doctor
because not only because of the obvious reasons that's
not a normal thing to happen. Um BUT also
because it probably means you have cancer, you very
probably have cancer. If you start lactating. Uh WHEN
you weren't actively trying to make that happen, there's,
you either have a tumor on your, you know,
pituitary gland or, or you're developing breast cancer. Uh
Males can get breast cancer. You get it way
less than females do, but you do. So you
know, pay attention to that stuff. However, if you
mean to try to, if this is a goal
that you have as a person who has a
Y chromosome, but means to lac Well, interestingly, I
found out writing this book, um trans women who
want to nurse their babies that they have had
born through surrogates or have adopted, take the exact
same sequence of hormones that a si woman will
do a person with two X chromosomes and breasts
that grew normally in puberty. Um, WHO want to
nurse adopted babies. Ok. So if you're a person
who hasn't given birth for one reason or another,
you don't have a uterus or your uterus didn't
do the thing. Ok? You're going to take a
sequence of hormones. It's a medical treatment um called
the Newman Goldfarb Protocol. I believe that effectively mimics
the hormonal conditions of pregnancy and then birth. Yeah.
And in any given body, whether you are biologically
male or female, it is very likely to work.
You will very likely begin lactating if you experience
the sequence of hormones. Um AND you will produce
biologically identical milk, whether you have a Y chromosome
or not, it's been tested. Um Now you won't
produce what's called early milk, which is colostrum, which
is just that happens in the first few days
after one gives birth, it's kind of yellowy, it's
thick and you don't make very much of it.
All mammals do this in the first few days
and then you have what's called mature milk as
your milk glands develop. Uh YOU can't seem to
do that with the protocol and it might be
tied to something the placenta does. No one really
knows. However, again, you will produce milk, you may
not produce as much of it as a person
who has given birth themselves. However, there are a
lot of people who give birth who have difficulty
making milk. That's just a thing. It's wildly common.
Um, NEVER mind whether or not the baby is
any good at getting it out of you. Mine
were very much not did horrific damage to my
nipples. I can report, I won't show you, but
I can report, uh, it's healed, it's mostly healed.
It was mostly bruising, but it was, you know,
it was like, dear Lord, why is that? They
are so bad at that. But no, um the
milk that's made, I made plenty of it, but
there are many, many s women who do not.
Um So it's not actually, in other words, that
far out of the curve, if you think statistically
simply going through this protocol, no matter whether or
not you are a trans person or non binary
person, you will probably produce milk. Now, why you
would want to do such a thing is a
totally separate question. Ok. I would say the same
to any says women who want to, they're adopted
babies having not given birth themselves. Um Wonderful that
you want to, I don't judge you for your
reasons. Um It is a difficult thing that you
are doing whether or not you have to do
it through hormones or not. Uh Lactation has a
long evolved history but it is not, it is
not the point of your being as a parent,
you don't have to do this. But you could.
So another thing that usually goes associated with, uh,
I mean, organs that are capable of producing milk
is something that we, the guys and also a
few females tend to be quite fond of these
breasts.
Yes. Yes. These big, like pendulous things full of
fat that just hang off the front of my
chest wall. People are really into them. But,
but why are they there? I mean, is it
really just to please the guys or is there
any other reason behind it?
I think uh as of uh uh you know,
I love this question and it's true. I've been
very curious. I would actually kind of love mine
to be smaller. Frankly. They're annoying. Um But I
just don't want to have elective surgery and they
haven't given me scoliosis. Some women have big enough
breasts that it literally, you know, provides a kind
of horrible thing to their spine. And then surgically
it's very useful to just make them smaller. Some
people like to modify their bodies because of fashion,
whatever. Um I've chosen not to, but it is
true that people are fascinated by these damn things.
Um So b is it for them, is it
for men or not? Are they full of fat
and present in this very obvious physical way for
men or not? I think a first principle that
is always useful in the evolution of traits like
these is to assume functionality before attractiveness. There are
actually very few runaway traits, um, that, uh, in
sexual selection. So a runaway sexually selected trait is
something like, uh, the male Fiddler Fiddler crabs, giant
claw, you know, the one, that one crab that
has the one giant claw and then the rest
of his legs are just normal and it really
kind of sucks for him because he's like, what
the hell with this claw? Yeah. But he is
like, I got the claw though. And it's mostly
because the females are attracted to the claw. And
this is the assumption, right? And so that does
seem to be a sexually selected runaway trait. But
the thing is in female traits, it's actually very
unusual, especially in mammals to have runaway, sexually selected
traits. Precisely because our reproductive system is really, um,
costly. It's buggy, it's, um, complicated when things go
wrong in the female mammals body, you know, in
a mutation that, you know, has a thing, the
costs tend to be quite a lot higher for
the entire population. Precisely because we are the ones
who make the next generation. So literally, if it
makes us die or makes us worse at producing
babies, then it's very likely that our species is
not going to do well in terms of evolutionary
fitness. Yeah. So the first of all the idea
that it would be a runaway trade is immediately
suspicious because it's like we have to lactate through
these damn things. And we've already established in my
conversation with you that we're, it's not a perfect
system. Actually many, you know, these days I wonderfully
have the technological benefit of having had um you
know, a breast pump to, you know, hoover Dyson,
like suck industrial material out of me, you know,
to then nurse my child, which is something I
chose to do. This is recently invented, this is
not. So in other words, if it is so
common and it is for Children to have difficulty
latching or for newborns to have difficulty accessing milk
because that breast isn't doing it as effectively as
it might have in, you know, among others. Well,
that child is going to be compromised, right? That
child is going to have problems. So if you
think about messing with the boob just to make
it look hot, well, it better not get in
the way of the lactation because guys, you're really
going to screw up your whole species then. So
that's a good first principle functionality before attractiveness. The
best theory I've seen actually for why we have
the shape that we have this brush shape is
that it's really nice to not suffocate. Here's what
I mean by that, the human face uh has
a plane from the side. You know, uh if
you look at a human face from the side,
you'll see it's relatively flat, right? That the jaw
lines up pretty well, with the nose and the
forehead, right. It's kind of like a, a semi
flat surface. And if you look at the profile
of any given primate, including chimpanzees and Bonobos are
our local cousins, you know, you have actually the
position of the nose is a, is, is, there's
more of a jutting jaw. It's not as flat
a face, right? So when they suckle on this,
you know, mammary mound that is pretty close to
the chest wall, their noses are not squashed um
against the chest wall. When they try to nurse,
they have no problem breathing and nursing at the
same damn time, a human baby, if you were
completely close to the chest wall, if you didn't
have a slightly pendulous, slightly manipulable, uh upturned nipple
and a kind of swinging structure that can kind
of move around, um would probably have to hold
their breath while they nursed, which seems like a
bad idea just as a design option, you know,
that just doesn't seem like a good idea. So
the best theory I've seen for why we have
the shape we have is that it was easier
for babies to nurse.
And so when does the placenta come into the
picture? And why did females at a certain point
just decide to abandon the egg because it seemed
a little bit easier to just lay eggs?
Right. Oh my God. It's so much better to
just lay eggs. Are you kidding this? Is obviously
a better way of going about having babies. It's
actually kind of bat shit crazy that we placentals
produce babies the way that we do because remember
you're not simply like it's not. So what is
it to have a placenta? What is it to
have live birth the way we do? Um And
marsupials do. It means that you're not simply holding
your clutch of eggs inside your body to keep
it warm. You actually have the damn thing docking
onto you with a direct tissue contact, which we
call the placenta. So you've probably heard of the
umbilical cord, that's that tube that runs from the
baby to the mother's body, but it docks, then
there's a place where it kind of and it's
very Guillermo del Toro. It's very sort of horror
movie. If you've ever seen a picture of a
placenta, it is, it is gnarly to look at.
So I'll leave you to the internet to go
look. But it's this fleshy thing that invades the
wall of the uterus and you know, to varying
degrees then interacts with the mother's bloodstream to draw
material out. Um BLOOD and nutrients and building blocks.
It's hard to build a body, right? So that
is um crazy for a number of reasons. It's
incredibly dangerous for the maternal body because now you're
interacting with the maternal immune system so you can
get runaway inflammation. Remember this is an invader, it's
half of you. It's not all of you. It's
what's called a partial allo graft. Ok. So you're
somewhere between a baby and a tumor when you're
doing it this way. It's really, it's an invasive
process and of course, the embryo
actually doctor House called it a parasite.
It's not, you know, it's tricky. It's not only
a parasite, it's, it's fun to think of it
as a parasite. Fun because it's taboo and we
can make fun of how babies are. You know,
I think I call them blood sucking demon fetuses,
you know, in the human body. And it's true,
they're very, our, our embryos are very greedy and
our placentas are incredibly invasive. They penetrate the mother's
bloodstream in ways that uh is only true for
a handful of, of body types. Um WHICH is
why we menstruate the way we do. Uh So
no, the thing is um it's because it's a
partial all graft. There is some, you know, immunological
recognition. If you like it, it's made of half
of our genetic material, but it is different enough
that it is also more like a parasite anyway.
The point is is that to do that in
deep evolutionary time and now we're moving more towards
the, the moment. So, so the placenta evolves before
the asteroid comes down, knocks out all the dinosaurs
except for a bunch of still unhappy birds, right?
Like in that moment when the dinosaurs go and
the mammals fill their niches, you know, um the
placenta had already evolved, but then it becomes more
of a dominant thing, it becomes more of a
dominant thing after in the conditions of the post
asteroid apocalypse, right? Where this, for some reason was
either advantageous or just not deleterious enough, right? And
for some reason, more of the marsupials ancestors died
out because of that asteroid than the placental mammalian
ancestors died out. We don't know exactly why. Now
kangaroos and all of those sorts of little creatures
are mostly isolated to Australia, except for some South
American places where they originally evolved and the rest
of us mammals are, are doing live birth. Ok.
The reason it's crazy, the reason it's a terrible
idea is that you have direct conflict, you have
maternal fetal conflict because you have one pool of
resources. And if you imagine that the uterus is
an environment, well, you have two beings effectively. Although
it's a pro being when it's an embryo long
evolve to both stay alive and compete for resources
in that local environment. So, the embryo, because that's
what the placenta does has to somehow down regulate
the maternal immune system to allow it to not
be treated like an invader. But the maternal body
also somehow has to endure an incredible amount of
resources being sucked out of it on the regular
by a creature that's down regulating its immune system,
which of course makes it more vulnerable to infection,
which drives up its blood pressure Which, right. So,
it's a problem. It is a problem to have
live birth. It's not a great situation for us.
So, of course, we don't have time here unfortunately,
to a certain extent to get into all of
the different steps of the evolution of the reproductive
organs of the human female. But I mean, you
know, something that the other day dawned on me
this f crossed my mind before was that I
was talking with a friend of mine about embryo
development, about prenatal development. And suddenly it done done
me. Oh my God, we the guys are all
trans people because we all started off
inside a female body. Oh That's an interesting metaphor.
That's an interesting metaphor. I can't speak to what
it is to be a trans person and whether
or not that would resonate with such a person.
Um It is true however, that there is in
many ways, a mosaicism in many parts of the
body where a thing you would expect to be,
you know, statistically sex, typical one tissue to another
doesn't always follow the rules. This is most obviously
true in the brain. Um But it seems to
be true in some other tissues as well. Um
But we're only finally starting to get that picture
because we're finally studying the biology of sex differences.
We didn't know before we're only finding that out.
Now.
Uh So another interesting thing here that you talk
about in the book is the female orgasm. So,
I mean, I guess that some pe some people
would be wondering why do you need these orgasms
for? Exactly. And
how female are the ma
uh the female?
Ah OK. OK. Well, I mean, on 1st, 1st
principle, the reason for the female orgasm is that
females uh have pleasure and uh that pleasure should
be valued. Thank you very much. Um THAT I've
heard of that, but just it's worth saying, I
feel like it's worth saying anywhere because at some
point, maybe we'll all finally believe it. OK. So
there's that, but I think you were probably trying
to ask me uh as someone representing the science
behind it. Um Right. Yeah. So unfortunately, um female
typical orgasms there. This was a beautiful little paper
um that came out some years ago seemed to
be tied to ovulation. Um Once upon a time,
uh the female orgasm may well have triggered uh
the fo the egg follicle, you know, the developed
egg uh hatching as it were out of the
ovary and making its way into the fallopian tube.
Um You can still see a little bit of
this in the rabbit actually. So one of the
reasons that rabbits have so many babies, that's the
stereotype why we love to uh say the Easter
bunny is a rabbit because of Ancient Roman fertility
uh rights. And why we associate them with just,
you know, sex and babies in general is because
they ovulate in response to coitus, they get laid
and they immediately ovulate. That's how it works in
them. They don't have the estra cycle the way
we do in that they, you know, are only
fertile for a little bit. They uh could potentially
be fertile whenever they have sex. Ok. And so
the female orgasm uh seems in deep, deep time,
not just because of rabbits. This is also true,
I think, uh in a few other system, few
other body plants um to release an egg. Now,
thankfully, uh just birth control alone. Um That is
no longer the case. These things have been decoupled.
OK. And uh in the human body, the female
orgasm is not at all time to ovulation. It
is tied to our sense of satisfaction. It is
tied to potentially bonding with our mates. Maybe sometimes
it's tied to enjoying the very messy and often
unpleasant process of living in a body and being
mortal. It's tied to all those things, but it's
not tied to ovulation anymore.
So it's just for a pleasure then.
Yes.
Oh my God. That's really.
Now, now that said we often confusingly tie what
we call the neurological condition of having an orgasm,
you know, getting past the breakers, the wave, the
arriving at the moment and the trumpet sound, whatever
your metaphor is fine, you know, we, we confuse
sexual arousal and orgasm in that um It is
not the, it is not the case that a
woman cannot enjoy sex without having had an orgasm.
In that classic sense. Lots of us do. And
unfortunately, many of us won't even experience our first
orgasm until later in life. In part, because we've
had many lousy lovers who have no idea what
a clitoris is fine. Um But also, uh you
know, there's, there's like sexism and there's just gender
mess and there's just, and there's also the simple
fact from what studies have been done on it,
that the vast majority of women uh do not
have orgasms uh without clitoral stimulation, simply penetration uh
tends not to, in part because uh the vagina
itself doesn't have as many nerves in it. Um
So it's not, it's not as dense a signal
as, as you like as the, as the clitoris
and its extended structure. Some women do have uh
some people with vaginas do have orgasms from penetration,
but usually that's not uh sufficient. So anyway, now
you've had that little bit of uh public service
announcement for what female orgasms are for and how
they work.
But, but you know, this is highly controversial because
I've heard that there's a book or several books
out there where s where people claim that uh
non reproductive sex is a sin. So that, that
should be a problem. No.
Oh, well, you see, I thought it was a
sin to make people suffer unnecessarily. I thought the
greatest sin actually was to make other people's lives
worse, uh in obvious and measurable ways, which is
to say, II I thought, um, devaluing the pleasure
of others lives and devaluing the existence of people
who are not like yourself was the greatest sin,
but perhaps I'm confused.
Uh uh Yeah, perhaps you are a and, and
something that I would imagine is not exactly for
the sake of your pleasure is menstruation. So
some people are into that me, not particularly, um
there is a whole subset of people who are
really, really into it. Um And uh and not
simply in kink space, but just in the experience
of having a body and I respect them personally.
Uh I, I, I'm happy to not have a
whole lot of it. I have an IUD and
so that thins the lining of my uterus. And
that means that at this point, I I experience
very little um externally obvious uh menstruation that is
different for every patient, of course. Um But no,
I um the point of menstruation actually uh is
to build a barrier between the maternal body and
the incoming fetus. The reason we build up the
lining of the uterus is precisely because we have
a very, very invasive placenta in our species. And
so um if we didn't do that, we might
well die, you know, uh trying to become pregnant
if we do, hopefully choose, hopefully, it is a
choice uh become pregnant without having built up that
lining. And it's just the, why we shed it
externally, uh as opposed to reabsorb, it, most species
that do this reabsorb, it just so, you know,
um, it just is probably more, uh, you know,
it, it's a cost, uh, it's a cost analysis
for whatever reason, our bodies evolved in a way
that it was less costly to just shed the
stuff than to just uh resorb it. Um, WHEN,
when we're done using it, who knows why we're
stuck with it.
So, one of the things that really, I I
mean, I wasn't expecting for you to cover in
the book. It surprised me was primate perception and
female perception. So why is it that you also
talk about that specifically? I mean, are there some
important ways by which uh female perception differs from
male perception?
Well, there were two, there were two reasons why
um the first and obvious reason is that um
I was interested in whether or not there was
anything important in sex differences. Uh At that moment,
we become primates when our ancestral line uh evolves
out of uh merely mammals and early primates arrive.
And what about the story of their evolution may
or may not apply to sex differences? Um BECAUSE
you and I are equally primate. Um But we
are also sex. So OK, so what was interesting
about that moment to me um the arrival of
primates is that it's very much a perception story
now by perception, I mean, our sensory array. OK?
I don't just mean our cultural perception just to
clarify. I mean, you know, this thing we call
a sensory array which is effectively your head, your
face. You know, you, you hang your sensors, your
primary sensors on this very usefully swivel, you know,
part of your body that you can turn in
one direction or another and has ears on either
side of it and eyes towards the front and,
and the nose and the mouth right centrally and
there you are, that's your sensory array, perceiving the
world around you in varying degrees specific to your
species. What's interesting about primates as this is a
moment where we really are evolving in the trees,
specifically in angiosperm forest. So this is something that's
a bit new after the apocalypse uh that killed
off the dinosaurs in the smoking holes that were
left. Um A bunch of fruiting trees uh took
hold and created these incredible canopies uh full of
delicious hanging fruit that of course many different species
that evolve to um eat and then of course
beneficial to the trees, uh poop out their seeds
in various spots making hence new trees, right? So
there's this long messy process of creatures taking advantage
of this new environmental condition, this new ecosystem is
growing and primates are very, very much a part
of it. So, one of the best theory goings
I think for why primates are the way they
are. Um MANY features of our bodies is that
we evolved to eat fruit in angiosperms hanging on
what's called the distal branch. The more the thinner
branches where the fruit is, you know, out towards
there. So our pro proprioception, our ability to move.
Uh THAT so many of us have these grasping
hands. Of course, most primates are still in the
trees, not all but many, we still have that
opposable thumb, that grasping thing that grabs on to
a branch. Um And also our perception, however, because
optimizing to eat, not just bugs anymore, which a
lot of early mammals did. We were insectivores, but
also fruit. Now means being able to tell when
tender leaves and ripe fruit are ripe, which means
you have to see color in a certain way.
Um It means having to hear and see things
in this complicated environment that isn't just back and
forth, but up and down very 3d. Once you
live in the trees, that's a very different sensory
environment than when you're scuttling along the ground and
living in burrows, right? So, um so there, so
it seemed to me that the moment we become
primates is really deeply about trees, it's really about
our sensory array. And because there are known sex
differences in primates um for our sensory array, slight
differences in our visual perception, slight differences in our
hearing and a little bit in our noses, olfaction
too. Um That seems like an important story to
tell
uh and I, I mean those stories that sometimes
we hear about women, uh when it comes to
color vision, being able to distinguish between more colors
than men and seeing more colors. And when it
comes to smell, being more sensitive to smell and
being able to identify uh different uh more smells
than more odors than men. Is that true?
Yes, actually, but not always in the ways you
might think and not always for the reasons you
might think. Now, when it comes to vision, when
it comes to our eyeballs, there are certain kinds
of color blindness that are X linked traits, which
means that if you only have one X chromosome,
you're more likely. So there is a male typical
color blindness, not all males have it, but males
do have for the lack of the X chromosome.
There are other kinds of color blindness but men
are more likely to have this kind. So there's
the most simple and obvious way that many men
are less good at color because you have a
hard time. If you have this distinguishing as my
husband does between red and green, you know, he'll
ask me to bring over the red blanket, which
is very brown. It is a very, actually brown
blanket. There is no mista it and I often
have to be like, do you mean the brown
blanket? He's like, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The blank. That
one, you know, because I'm cold, bring me the
thing that we both understand, why do you have
to correct me. Um And likewise for green things
versus red things. So, um, in the ancestral condition,
uh this may or may not have been a
big problem. It's still so common that it clearly
wasn't so costly that anyone who had it would
die. Let's put it that way. Um But when
you eat certain kinds of fruit, when you are
creatures that optimize for eating a tender green, you
know, reddish green sort of bud versus a more
mature leaf, which might be less nutritious for you
or harder to digest. It can really be advantageous
to have something like color vision if you are,
of course, creatures that are living in the daytime
and not the night time, which was a big
shift for a lot of primates. We began as
nocturnal creatures and then we shifted to day eaters
and that, of course, totally changed our color vision.
Yeah. So that's the thing now, whether or not
it's true that a typical si woman can look
out and understand fine differences between the colors of
a freaking shirt. Uh This feels cultural, this feels
maybe if you're not literally color blind, I think
that's just how that brain evolved to pay attention
to certain things, which is probably like a culturally
situated, whatever, right? I don't know that it's actually
true that we are more aesthetically responsive as females
that seems like a weird, like gender story or
something. I think there are, there are many male
people who are perfectly excellent at being, for example,
fashion designers. Thank you very much. Um However, it
is true that there are a number of women
who are tetra chromat. There is this extra gene
that can produce extra um the ability to do.
Let me say that again, there are people who
because of having two X chromosomes may have extra
copies of things in their retinas that let them
see a more diverse array of color, something more
akin. In fact to what birds do. They have
eyes or at least they have retinas like birds,
but they don't know that they do. You have
to do a genetic test for the damn thing.
And then you have to see if they even
experience it because of course, when we grow up,
we live in a sensory world in which we
live, which is optimized for trichromatism, which is what
you and I probably have, you know, picture a
stoplight, you, you, you you can see certain colors
and we live in a social environment in which
that sensory ability is rewarded, right? We don't need
to see things like birds. It's not useful to
see a weird shimmering rainbow coming off of every
single time you see a wave on the ocean,
you know, um it it's not rewarded. So in
many cases, most of the genetically tetra chromat folk
uh can't really say what they are seeing or
may not even consciously register that they're vaccinating millions
more colors, distinguishable colors than we are. There's been,
I think only a handful of people, maybe one
or two who are yes women who are tetra
chromat who know that they are seeing this incredible
array of colors and can report it. So, really,
this weird number up to maybe a quarter of
all women are like secret superheroes that just haven't
trained their powers
but, but uh a about the smell bit. Uh
I mean, we're, we're being very feist here but,
but le let's try to be a little bit
more gender equal because what I'm about to ask
you is something that many times when women, for
example, are pregnant, makes men who, who wake up
at 4 a.m. and go out to buy chocolate
or whatever. So I, I
remember just a partner being very nice. Ok? It's
not that we have to have a 4 a.m.
chocolate. It's just that um well, there's two levels
there now that isn't, well, that's part of olfaction
because to have a a craving for a food
is partially to desire, the taste and taste is
greatly a part of smell, but it's also very
much a brain based thing that somehow interacting with
your enteric nervous system, your guts uh that also
desire a food. So wanting a food is actually
kind of a whole body thing um which indeed
does go a little haywire when you're pregnant famously.
So, um, you also will experience more revulsion towards
certain tastes and smells that you didn't feel repulsed
by before at all. Um And that's what's interesting.
So two things are going on there or at
least that's the theory. There may be shifts in
raw olfaction, your ability to smell and taste, which
may be heightened in other words, or changed in
some deep way. You become better at smelling faint
things maybe when you're pregnant. So that's like a
nose based kind of thing. And then there's just
brain based stuff, which is your emotional response to
this stuff, right? Because it's not simply when you
smell a thing, then you have an emotional response
to what you smell, not simply like in a
Proust Madeleine like, oh I have memories of my
childhood and I like eating chocolate, you know, whatever,
right? You know, um it's more like a it's
like uh we are always, our brains are always
already emotional. That's how we are as these social
primates, right? So there's literally never a moment. You're
not having some emotional response.
Wait a minute are men also emotional. That's another
one.
Very much. So you cannot have a brain and
not be emotional. OK? It's just Lisa Feldman Barrett
has talked a lot about this. You know, there
are many very excellent scientists who have been trying
to convince people that this thing we call emotion
is not so segregated you know, this is not
Antonio. Damasio also talks about this, you know, this
all of these categories of emotional response are very
much embedded in literally every thought that we have,
we just only register those very emotional things is
like, oh, well, that's emotion is like no, literally
everything you're doing with your brain involves emotion anyway,
moving on. So, ok, so emotional response then when
you're pregnant may well be heightened to not only
olfactory signal but to many things. And that is
absolutely a response to the hormonal craziness that pregnancy
involves. And so that's why disgusting things smell very
disgusting and things that normally don't smell disgusting may
well for that person suddenly be disgusting. And that
other thing that they are normally not that into
suddenly becomes the thing that you require at 4
a.m. Some of that is your nose, some of
that is your nose, but not all of it.
And, and is that in any way also a
mechanism to protect the fetus from potential uh bad
foods, I mean infections or something like that,
maybe, maybe. Um THAT'S one of the good theories
going for it. Um And there are ways of
testing it in ways not of testing it. And
of course, we don't test it in pregnant human
beings. Um We do this more to pregnant rats
and see, do they avoid the poison or not?
You know. Um But when that, when pregnant, um
the idea is that there are some tastes that
like bitter, bitter tastes are very commonly associated with
many kinds of toxic things in the world. So
we, uh tend to have a very negative response
to things that taste bitter. We tend to have
more of a negative response when we're pregnant. And
one assumes that that could have an evolved feature
that this would be beneficial to avoid poisons. You
know, because the plant world turns out it's full
of poison. Um YOU know, when you are a
a pregnant body. So, um yes. So it may
well be that there is some avoidance that gets
heightened when you're pregnant and that your changes in
your taste and your emotional response to taste and
scent uh are sort of a built in evolved
and advantageous feature. You know, there may also be
a nutrition seeking that happens because again, we've established
that it's crazy not to lay eggs. So, you
know, you may well seek certain kinds of uh
nutritive sources when you are pregnant that you wouldn't
normally be so desirous of. But let's not always
assume 1 to 1, not everything that happens in
pregnancy is an evolved thing that's advantageous. Some of
it is very much accident. Some of it just
sucks.
But then you arrive at a point in our
revolutionary history where you have these new reproductive system,
you have pregnancy, you have birth, but then we
become bipedal. And I guess that to a certain
extent was not very pleasant,
right? Some of it was great. Ok. Some of
bipedalism is, which is walking on two legs. Uh
You know, because the assumption is before we were
based largely in the trees and we did a
little bit of walking around on two legs like
tree based primates sometimes do. Uh, BUT it wasn't,
it wasn't our primary mode of locomotion. Yeah. Um,
WE were never knuckle walkers. That's uh a thing
that we've been correcting in the paleo record. And
you know, those little uh diagrams where you see
the knuckle walker on the left and evolves up
to a guy walking and then you see him
usually for a joke at the end sitting at
a computer typing and this is the evolution of
man. Yeah. Well, um so it's actually the case
that no, we were more like these things with
our arms up up in the trees and then
skip the knuckle walking all together because that's a
separate evolutionary path. OK. So anyway, walking upright, um
means shifting the pelvis a bit in order to
have a better structure to anchor the buttocks. Actually,
one of the big ways we walk actually is
our butts. It's one, it is, in fact the
biggest single muscle, the gluteus maximus in the human
body. And it is incredibly important and it is
anchored in all kinds of ways. You actually have
a number of butt muscles, gluteus, maximus, gluteus, medius,
gluteus, minimus exactly as it sounds anyway. So you
have a number of butt muscles holding you up
there and then your spine forms a curve shape
to absorb, you know, impact because there's a lot
of force now and what have you and suddenly
you're an upright being. But of course, because we
have long evolved to give birth through a birth
canal, which is situated down going between the hip
bones, well, bringing the hip bones upright. Unfortunately, also
means closing the pelvic opening to make it a
little bit smaller than it used to be. Yeah.
So um that has been ever since. Not great,
not great. I would say not wonderful at all
because you see, we now have the condition of
very large babies and very small pelvic openings through
which our birth canal passes. Ok. We have what's
called an obstetric dilemma. Um Now, it's been used
to explain lots and lots of things. I think
the most compelling thing about the obstetric dilemma is
simply that it's dangerous. Um Not that it shaped
everything in our path. Um The most dangerous feature
of our reproduction is our placenta actually, but still
getting them out of the body. Not great because
you're trying to take a watermelon size thing and
squeeze it through a lemon sized hole. And if
you've met fruit, you can understand that mechanistically, this
is a problem and we from uh pelvic analyses
and uh comparative uh morphologies and what have you
we now have a general sense that starting at
least by Lucy, uh the australopithecine 3.2 million years
ago. Um We had this problem, we had a,
we had a too narrow opening in these bipedal
hominins and relatively large babies. And uh the assumption
then is that Lucy like us, probably had a
midwife.
Yeah, I, I mean, it would be very interesting
to get into the midwife a bit, but unfortunately,
taking into account our time limit. Uh AND because
I mentioned at the beginning that I was going
to ask you about this, let's move on to
another topic. What about menopause? I, I mean, why
is it that at a certain point in the
in the life of the life of females, they
reach a point where they are no longer able
to reproduce, but they still live past them.
It is one of the great biological mysteries actually.
Now it is not a mystery why a person
who no longer gives birth uh is valuable to
society and we often confuse those questions. Ok. Uh
The entire point of a woman's life uh is
not simply to make babies. Thank you very much.
But this is also true in the evolutionary sense,
believe it or not. This is all so true
in the deep uh evolution of our body plans
because what we fundamentally are, of course, is not
simply baby makers. What we fundamentally are again is
social primates and each member of our communities contributes
equally to the success of our communities because we
are so interdependent, so communally bound. Yeah. So that
means of course, that our elderly should they survive
to become elderly, are valuable to the community for
many reasons. But let me first say, getting back
into the mechanisms of it. The reason it's a
mystery that menopause exists in part is because we
are one of the only species that has it.
OK. The only confirmed for sure, confirmed everyone in
the scientific community 100% agrees creatures that have menopause,
which is to say we live a full third
of our lives after having stopped ovulating, after having
stopped, having had the ability to make babies are
human beings and a handful of toothed whales pretty
much that. Yep. Uh The ones we know most
about among the toothed whale are orca killer whales.
So basically, we have humans and we have killer
whales and that's what we're working with in terms
of understanding menopause, which is not a great scientific
situation to be in, in part because of course,
uh killer whales live in the damn ocean and
it is hard to study killer whales because boats
and ocean anyway. So we finally did, however, figure
it out and we were able, we the scientific
community, not me, I didn't do this research, but
the people who did are brilliant. So one of
the big theories for what you know, the evolutionary
conditions in which menopause was favored. In the rare
cases. It is, is that maybe menopausal females who
no longer have their own babies can then help
with the childcare for the third generation. They don't
have a competition for resources with their daughters to
provide for their offspring. Yeah. And they, uh, can
then, and they're free, they have more free time
as it were. It's kind of like the kindly
grandmother is gonna help out with childcare while the
the, you know, the daughter, the mother of that
grandchild can go do other things, right? So this
was the idea for how menopause may be evolved.
It's called the grandmother hypothesis. OK. Cool. I loved
my grandmother too. She died before she was able
to help with childcare, but she, she was a
lovely woman. I remember her cookie jar. Um And
I would like that to be the story. However,
it does not seem to be the case that
at least among the only other known type of
creatures that have menopause that they help out with
the third generation more. Actually, in killer whales, they
don't help protect the grand babies more. They don't
help get more food and do more food sharing
with that generation because they are, they have so
much free time. No, actually the only thing they're
known for among these menopausal workers who are matriarchal.
By the way, the grand menopausal grandmothers are very
much the grand dams in charge of the whole
business for the whole pod in times of stress,
they are good at leading the pod to good
sources of food. Ok. So the local easy food
has run out. These menopausal grandmothers are good at
knowing where the hell the rarer sources that are
reliable of food are located and they literally lead
the dam pod there. They're also more involved in
teaching younger generations uh specialized hunting techniques like you
know, that thing where you may have seen a
video online where you see, uh orca, you know,
killer whales lining up in a row and then
they bum rush an ice floe where a seal
is sitting on top of the ice and the
bow wave of their movement knocks the seal off
the ice, which is a very good day for
the killer whale is a very bad day for
the seal, right? Yes. So that's a specialized hunting
technique that has to be taught. And the, uh,
the matriarchs are very much involved in the teaching
of the young, which is to say what in
that situation, what the menopausal grandmothers are good for
is simply still being alive and knowing stuff. Ok.
So let's think back to the human beings. What
if all of humanity selected four traits that extended
our lifespan? We know it did. We know for
a very long time, we died around 35. Ok.
But at some point, the assumption is it's many
different traits in the body we evolved the ability
to live longer. We evolved the ability to live
into our freaking sixties, seventies God, eighties now, even
hundreds. That's a runaway train. But you know, we,
we have evolved longevity, human type, longevity. Ok, which
would be beneficial to everyone. Should you manage to
make it precisely because then you have generations that
remember how to survive difficult conditions that are rare,
right? So both grandmothers and grandfathers then would be
good at remembering how to survive the flood that
had happened 30 years ago because they were alive
at the moment that a lot of other people
were literally not yet born. Ok. In a social
environment before you have anything like God, the written
word. Are you kidding? No, when all you have
is the ability to talk to one another. When
all you have is the ability to, you know,
maybe a little bit better than monkey. See, monkey
do the elderly members of the group are very
good at helping an interdependent group survive a dangerous
world. And so the reason we have menopause in
that case is more that the ovaries never got
the message. They're still running the old monkey plan.
And it turns out this is true. Our ovaries
are finessing at a very typical rate for a
primate. You know, there have been studies now that
look across species that indeed our ovaries are aging
at a sort of normal primate rate given an
expected lifespan. And it's just that they never got
the message that they were supposed to live longer.
Personally. I'm very glad for this because I don't
want to give birth in my seventies. I'm good.
I'm good. I'm happy in fact, to be done
with the two times I have given birth and
to literally never do that again, would be ideal.
Um BECAUSE the way we do it is again
terrible, but it does mean that we have a
lot of knock on effects. Unfortunately, a lot of
post menopausal conditions like osteoporosis and other things in
which there is a kind of mismatch between the
older body and the rest of our body systems
and the ovary, which had long been involved in
this complex hormonal signaling system that, you know, keeps
everything in check, right, the endocrine system, in other
words, that then changes and starts to screw things
up a bit.
So, uh ii, I mean, uh th this might
be a sort of very short uh psychoanalytic ses
session. But uh I mean, since we're talking about
older women, I I'm very worried about uh this
bit here. So because uh that there are some
older women that I find very attractive, but then
I tune into Mano Sphere podcasts and uh I
don't know, red Pill community forums and they basically
say that women have an expiration date. So, am
I a freak or what?
Well, um I mean, the short answer is yes
and no uh you may be, you may be
a freak in that you give a damn about
women suffering that uh unfortunately may be more of
the signal given how much of the world seems
to. Not. So it's a, it's a good thing.
It's a good thing in terms of whether you,
you're freaking kink space. Oh, actually, attraction to older
bodies seems very common. You need only look at
the internet and porn for granny, porn, my God.
Um It's everywhere. So no, that seems a very
common uh thing that many people are into and
you need not get into the details about how
into it you are. OK. Now, II I wouldn't
dream of asking. No. So I would say at
least in the manoe. Um AND the idea of
women having an expiration date, well, you know, I'll
even have a little bit of sympathy here whenever
somebody needs to make the claim that somebody else
has an expiration date. It's usually because they have
anxiety about their own. Ok? So usually a lot
of this bigotry, a lot of this misogyny, a
lot of this crap is inevitably coming from um
somebody who doesn't know what to do with their
own vulnerability, you know that something about their lives
really sucks and they don't know how to feel
about it. And they live indeed in this case,
in a sexist world that is also hard on
men in different ways and, and the way that
they are coping is by being assholes. So, you
know, we're, we're not perfect beings. Ok. Many of
us cope by turning into assholes. It's just some
are worse than others about it. Scientifically though, I
think you also mean to ask me, however you
may not know. Although having read my book, maybe
you do that among other primates, actually, aged females
are often the most attractive members of a group.
So chimpanzees at the very least famously, so are
extremely attracted to the eldest females in their group.
That chick is the sexiest thing to a chimp
male and she will have her teeth falling out,
she will have patches falling out of her hair.
I mean, you know, there's granny porn and then
there's what chimps are into. My God, they are
into very elderly females. Now, in part, it may
be because many chimpanzees indeed do give birth when
they're elderly. And so simply having signals that you
have survived that long and having well established social
hierarchies in this group where you may be an
alpha female at this point is a very sexy
thing to a chimp male, you know, so, um
you know, maybe your desires are a continuation of
older patterns, I couldn't say. Uh BUT I think
actually when it comes to when it comes to
human sexuality, though, assume diversity is the norm, we're
just really horny. We are horny creatures and we
are often promiscuous creatures. And so that anyone would
have something they're into isn't surprising. It just shouldn't
be surprising. That's just how we are with sort
of everything.
But I guess that makes a very good segue
to my last question and I hope this is
a quick one because I'm really getting mindful of
your time here. But do we have any idea
where sexism comes from? I mean, because it's one
thing for it to exist, but where does it
stem from?
Exactly. Let me make sure I know what you
most want out of this question. Do you mean
when did sex evolve? Males and females like way
the hell back, like, I mean, before fish or
do you mean, uh, sex in the human body
or what, what
I means to aspects to the question? First of
all, since we're talking here about evolutionary biology, if
you think there are any evolutionary basis for sexism,
that's the first one and the second sexism, sexism
and, and the second one, I mean, culturally speaking,
when did things like the patriarchy started? And all
of that?
You mean the final chapter of my book? Yes.
Let's see if I can do that chapter quickly.
Um Let's see. Well, I can tell you a
few important, important features of that chapter. The first
is that I have always found it very suspicious
when we see women reinforcing sexist rules, um, which
is very, very common, very, very common. It's not
rare even remotely, it is extremely common that and
sometimes the most vocal, you know, advocates of uh
gender norms and sexism in general, you know, things
that would seem to not benefit them or any
other female that they're advocating for um, is somehow
what's called internalized sexism, which somehow, in other words
that they have taken sexist ideals, which must evolve
from the patriarchy and from men, that men would
be the origins of sexism and then they've taken
it into themselves and they're just poor, pathetic little
puppets. Yeah. Mouthing the uh the ideas of others.
And you see similar ideas are equally um patronizing
about poor people, advocating for conservatism when it doesn't
benefit them. You know, economically in various countries. We,
in other words, we, we like to denigrate people
who seem to be making political and social choices
that don't obviously benefit themselves. So it's useful to
not be so patronizing. There's always that as a
first principle. Um But in biology, it's also useful
and this is something I do in the book
to say. Well, no, we actually know that huge
numbers of women are advocates for very restrictive sex
rules. And what I mean in here it's like
a subset of sexism, which is what females can
wear, where they can go in a day, what
sort of jobs they can have, what who they
can interact with and definitely anything around anyone they
might have sex with. And then then on into
the baby making and the norms for all of
that. Right? You know that they're very vocal advocates
for this kind of stuff. It seems to me
a bit foolish to think that this is simply
internalized sexism that no, there must be something driving
this because we are, of course, any good behaviorist
will tell you in biology that we are social
beings, we are all equal participants in our social
rules. We generate them, we reinforce them, we we
push against them. We're all doing this together. None
of us is in control of the rules, right?
We're all building them and making them and reinforcing
them all the time throughout our lives. Women too.
And I, so I thought, well, OK, I've just
spent a decade of my life thinking about deep,
deep time and body plans and evolution. And what
would an evolutionary biologist say about all of this?
Um Well, a lot of these sex rules are
directly tied to the levers of reproduction. Ok. So
they have to do with access to female bodies,
how much of that body can be seen in
what context and by whom, how much of that
body can be approached in what context and by
whom? And God, by the time you get to
anything directly involving sex, there are many, many, many
rules, right? And of course around baby making too,
which is to say all of these, this constellation
of sex rules together are manipulating culture by culture,
the fertility of the females in that culture, when
she has babies and under what conditions and with
whom right now, if you think back to an
ancestral state where again, female birth is incredibly dangerous
uh female, right? You know that sorry by female
birth, I simply mean giving birth is dangerous being
pregnant, giving birth and the postpartum recovery period and
then lactation and everything. This is a vulnerable, dangerous
period that is hard to do. Ok. So controlling
when and how you get pregnant. Culture by culture,
the rules are different but every single one has
rules, access to female bodies, every culture is different,
but we all have strong rules and we feel
strongly about them. This is manipulating fertility patterns. That's
the biological perspective. And in deep time culture by
culture, in various environments that may well have been
biologically beneficial. It may have helped more females survive
and thrive in their babies too, right? Because in
some environments, it might be good to have cultural
rules that effectively cluster your births that at the
start of your reproductive life, you have a bunch
of babies and then you just raise those babies
and that's how you do it. Now. That's going
to be differently. Rewarding depending how much food is
available. If it's seasonal, et cetera, et ce, right?
In other environments, it might be better to space
out. Your birds might be better to start later
and have a later cluster right after you have
arrived at a certain point in a social milieu
arrived at a certain point with a certain social
status, right, that the birds come later after you've
achieved it. Anyway, the point is is that every
human culture seems to have something like a drive.
I know scientifically, the word drive is complicated, but
we seem driven nonetheless, not only to create culture
but to create sex rules within our many cultures
and then strongly reinforce them and when we change
them, then strongly reinforce the change. And we always
feel very passionately about it. And it seemed to
me that that's simply something that human beings may
well do precisely because we're so bad at giving
birth. But the thing is is that we also
evolved this beautiful thing called human type gynecology. We
have an incredible tool set that comes from the
dawn of midwifery back in the australopithecines and all
the way forward. We're much better at it now
that also intervenes on human fertility. And it is
actually a hell of a lot better at keeping
women and girls alive and thriving and surviving through
the messy process of having a female body. So
maybe just now we arrive at a moment in
human evolution where we can get our heads above
water and um choose.
And I mean, if people want to learn more
about that and other aspects of our sociality, they
can of course read your book if how the
female body drove 200 million years of human evolution.
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview and Dr Bohannon, thank you so
much again for taking the time to come on
the show. It's been really fun to talk with
you.
It's been fun to talk with you too and
I hope you all enjoy the book.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger and H her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S friends,
David Sloan Wilson, Ya Des Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi, Nale me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
Y Polton John Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franka Gil Cortez or Scott Zachary.
Ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki,
Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists Larry Dey junior
old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark
Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B brand
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perlis, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si
Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all